Name is
Dave Fennema and I raise commercial
broilers and some pigs and some cows,
but on a very small scale,
the name of the farm is Spencer Creek Farm
and are closely associated
with Fenwood farms.
I think one of my
major philosophies is - is I just try
to guide everything along without.
Trying to force anything
because everything has a balance
I try to connect all the circles,
all the all the loose ends,
so I try to make sure
that everything I produce is used.
For example, I have in my barns, my
chickens, I produce chickens, my brothers,
my main meat is my main product,
but I also produce manure as a byproduct.
Right.
So I will sell that manure to
other farmers that use it on their fields.
Right.
And I have cattle here
which graze all my land,
which is not very useful for crops
because it's too hilly and too swampy,
and they eat up my leftover chicken feed
if I if I have any.
Same with my pigs.
So I try to close all the circles.
The birds that I raise are
there are from a commercial line,
so I raise a commercial bird.
It's a Ross Ross
Bird,
which is the Ross is the breed and
It takes about 42 days,
I get them as day old chicks
and at the end of 42 days,
they weigh approximately
2.7 kilos live weight.
They grow extremely fast.
Every week I get a shipment of chicks in
and 1/3 of that
batch of chicks goes into a barn
where I raise antibiotic free birds
and they're also animal byproduct free
so in a commercial operation,
the feed will typically
contain a meat protein.
And which is the animal byproduct
after it's been rendered,
and so in our antibiotic
free program and our animal byproduct
free program, there's no meat protein.
So they get their protein from soy meal
instead of meat.
And then one that the other two thirds
goes into our organic stream
and the organic stream is
raised to a higher standard.
All the feed has to be certified organic,
which means that the grains
are not genetically modified.
The grains have never been sprayed.
They've been raised in fields that have
crop rotation program implemented.
Whereas my antibiotic free program,
the grains are commercial
so I'm using, they have, I think
they could be genetically modified,
they could be sprayed.
Right.
So the organic strain is a higher
quality of product,
but it's
also more difficult to raise. Yes.
And that cost reflects the organic grain
which are more expensive
because it's more labor intensive
to produce organic grain
in a commercial crop
grain crop you can spray your fields,
whereas organic crop
you actually have to physically
till down the weeds,
and your production
is a little bit lower in organics
because you have more weed competition
and you don't always have
the commercial fertilizers
to to synthetically pop up your yields.
There's also more labor involved in
the actual raising of the organic birds.
So the standards say that I have to have
it's 21 kilograms per of bird
per square metre
which is my density levels for organics.
With my ABF products, my antibiotic
free birds, I don't have that limitation.
So I have to have more physical
barn space,
which means I have to use more fuel
to heat the barn.
I have to use more
shavings to cover the floor.
I'm also
required by organic standards
to let the birds outside.
So that requires that in the mornings
I raise the doors up till I'm outside.
In the evening,
I lower them again,
so I have to go in the barn
more often, sometimes
have to physically chase them in.
Right.
So the higher prices do they reflect the
the different level of energy production
that goes into the organic product?
OK, we are John and Carol Fennema.
We are the founders and owners of Fernwood
Farm.
And obviously, as my wife, Carol, here
she I'd like to say
I'm the right hand person,
but no, I'm the left.
one day decided
we decided that we were going to start
selling free range chicken.
So we had like 30 birds we put outside,
we had them processed
and then we put one liner or two liner
in the spectator
and we couldn't believe all the
the attention we got.
And we just had them packed on ice
and we had them
out of the foyer of our house
and we thought, Well,
this is this is pretty good.
And at the same time, when we did these
days of
sale where we would sell the chickens,
which did grow over the years, like,
I mean, quite substantially,
we used to have open houses,
we used to have hot dogs
and hamburgers, and we used to have hikes
or rides for the kids.
So it was like a bit of a fair here.
And then one day we met somebody who said,
Why don't you try organic farming?
And we just followed their suggestion,
and he gave us some contacts and away
we went.
Everybody's interested in nutrition.
Everybody wants really good nutrition,
and we feel
that what we're doing is for
everybody just needs to eat
well in order to feel well.
To live well.
And that's been our philosophy
the whole time is just raising
nutritional goal to be very authentic.
Only put the best
products into our chickens
and whatever we do,
and that includes the process
we try to hand process and we
I think we do a better job than any,
you know, really mechanized plant.
What we sell is a product,
but the product is
for us, the product is hope.
And I think everybody,
when they want to buy organic,
they're they're looking at hope.
They're hoping that it's
going to be better for them.
They're hoping it's
going to improve their health.
Now, a lot of times we get people
that are are ill or they've had something,
and now they're looking
for some alternative.
And I think organic, the whole
the whole organic industry is
a is a is a product of hope.
Fenwood farm strives to give the customer
the best quality
nutrition that we can grow.